MySQL Installation
Step 3: Creating a Database
Now, it's time to create a database specifically for the Pterodactyl panel. In this tutorial, we'll name the database 'panel,' but feel free to choose an alternative name if you prefer.
 CREATE DATABASE panel;
Step 4: Assigning Permissions
To allow the 'pterodactyl' user to access the 'panel' database, execute the following command:
 GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON panel.* TO 'pterodactyl'@'127.0.0.1';
This command grants the necessary permissions to ensure the Pterodactyl panel can interact seamlessly with the MySQL database.
Creating a Database Host for Nodes
Note: This section focuses on creating a MySQL user with privileges to create and modify users, a crucial requirement for the Panel to generate per-server databases on the specified host.
Step 5: Creating a User
If your database resides on a different host than the one hosting your Pterodactyl Panel or Daemon, be sure to utilize the IP address of the machine where the Panel is running. Using '127.0.0.1' for external connections will result in a 'connection refused' error. Customize the username and password to your preferences.
 CREATE USER 'pterodactyluser'@'127.0.0.1' IDENTIFIED BY 'somepassword';
Step 6: Assigning Permissions
The following command bestows your newly created user with the ability to create additional users and manage databases. As before, confirm that '127.0.0.1' corresponds to the IP address you used in the previous command.
 GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'pterodactyluser'@'127.0.0.1' WITH GRANT OPTION;
Step 7: Allowing External Database Access
If you need to enable external access to your MySQL instance, allowing game servers to connect, follow these steps:
Locate and open your my.cnf file, the configuration file for MySQL. The file's location may vary depending on your operating system and MySQL installation method. You can use the command below to locate it:
find /etc -iname my.cnf
Open my.cnf and add the following text at the end of the file:
[mysqld]
bind-address=0.0.0.0
Save the file.
Restart the MySQL or MariaDB service to apply these changes. This configuration change overrides the default MySQL settings, which typically accept requests only from localhost. By allowing bind-address to be 0.0.0.0, you enable connections on all interfaces, including external connections. Ensure that your firewall allows traffic on the MySQL port, typically port 3306.
If your database and Pterodactyl Wings are hosted on the same machine and do not require external access, you can alternatively use the 'docker0' interface's IP address rather than '127.0.0.1.' You can find this IP address by running the command ip addr | grep docker0, which typically appears as '172.x.x.x.'.
With these steps, you've successfully configured a MySQL database for Pterodactyl, ensuring the necessary user privileges and, if needed, enabling external access for game servers. Please take into account security best practices and tailor the configurations to your specific requirements.